Add a tutorial about arrays (#1405)
ocaml/v3.ocaml.org: data/tutorials/language/1ds_01_arrays.md

- : int = 4
```

## Modifying Array Elements

To modify an element in an array, we simply assign a new value to it using the indexing operator. For example, to change the value of the third element of the array `even_numbers` created above to 42, we have to write:

```ocaml
# even_numbers.(2) <- 42;;
- : unit = ()
```

Note that this modification doesn’t return the modified array: the value returned by this operation is `unit`, `even_numbers` is modified in place in the current scope. Updating an array's content is a side effect.

## The Standard Library `Array` Module

OCaml provides several useful functions for working with arrays. Here are some of the most common ones:

### Length of an Array

The `Array.length` function returns the size of an array:

```ocaml
# Array.length even_numbers;;
- : int = 5
```

### Iterate on an Array

`Array.iter` applies a function to each element of an array, one at a time. The given function must return `unit`, operating by side effect. To print all the elements of the array `zeroes` created above, we can apply `print_int` to each element:

```ocaml
# Array.iter (fun x -> print_int x; print_string " ") zeroes;;
0 0 0 0 0 - : unit = ()
```

> 

Reviewer: I think this could be a good place to comment, that `for` loops tend to work well for iterating on arrays too.
One option would be to translate the `iter` example:
```ocaml
# for i = 0 to Array.length a - 1 do print _int zeroes.(i); print_string " " done;;
 ```
 which offer the occasion to point that the control flow of the loop is more complex : what happens if we use the wrong start index, or forgot the `-1`? Of if we access another array ?
 Another option would be the Fisher–Yates shuffle
 ```ocaml
 let exchange a i j = let tmp = a.(i) in a.(i) <- a.(j); a.(j) <- tmp
 let shuffle a = for i = Array.length a - 1 downto 1 do
    exchange a i (Random.int (i+1))
 done
 ```
 which gives a more consistent example of which kind of array code ends up using loops.

---
id: arrays
title: Arrays
description: >
  The standard library's Array module
category: "Data Structures"
---

# Arrays

## Introduction

> In OCaml, arrays are collections of elements of the same type that are stored in contiguous memory locations. They are mutable, each value can be updated, but they have a fixed size; which set them apart from lists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In OCaml, arrays are collections of elements of the same type that are stored in contiguous memory locations. They are mutable, each value can be updated, but since they have a fixed size, it sets them apart from lists.
```

> In OCaml, arrays are collections of elements of the same type that are stored in contiguous memory locations. They are mutable, each value can be updated, but they have a fixed size; which set them apart from lists.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In OCaml, arrays are collections of elements of one type. Unlike lists, arrays can be mutated by replacing their elements with other values of the same type, but cannot be resized. Arrays also allow efficient access to elements at any position.
```

> Despite these differences many of the functions readily available on arrays are similar to the ones available for lists, please refer to the [List tutorial](https://ocaml.org/docs/lists) and documentation for more details about these functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite these differences, many of the functions readily available on arrays are similar to the ones available for lists. Please refer to the [List tutorial](https://ocaml.org/docs/lists) and documentation for more details about these functions.
```

Reviewer 3: if it is permitted to link to the manual in these docs:

```suggestion
Despite these differences, many of the functions readily available on arrays are similar to the ones available for lists. Please refer to the [List tutorial](https://ocaml.org/docs/lists) and [documentation](/api/List.html) for more details about these functions.
```

> Despite these differences many of the functions readily available on arrays are similar to the ones available for lists, please refer to the [List tutorial](https://ocaml.org/docs/lists) and documentation for more details about these functions.

Reviewer 4: I think it'd be helpful to mention some example before urging new users/readers back to the List tutorial.

> Despite these differences, many of the functions readily available on arrays are similar to the ones available for lists such as X, Y, and Z. Please refer to the [List tutorial](https://ocaml.org/docs/lists) and documentation for more details about these functions.

This tutorial aims to introduce the subject of arrays in OCaml and showcase the most useful functions and use cases.

Arrays are commonly used in OCaml for tasks such as:

- Storing and processing large amounts of data
- Implementing algorithms that require random access and modification of elements
- Working with matrices and other multi-dimensional data structures

## Creating Arrays

To create an array in OCaml, you can use the `[| ...; ... |]` syntax, which allows you to specify the values of each element directly. For example, to create an array with the values 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, you will write `[| 1; 2; 3; 4; 5 |]`:

```ocaml
# [| 1; 2; 3; 4; 5 |];;
- : int array = [|1; 2; 3; 4; 5|]
```

> Alternatively, you can create an array using the `Array.make` function, which takes two arguments: the length of the array and the initial value of each element. For example, to create an array of length 5 with all elements initialized to 0, you can write:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can create an array using the `Array.make` function, which takes two arguments: the length of the array and the initial value of each element. For example, to create an array of length 5 with all elements initialised to 0, you can write:
```

```ocaml
# let zeroes = Array.make 5 0;;
val zeroes : int array = [|0; 0; 0; 0; 0|]
```

> It is also possible to use `Array.init` to generate an array by applying a function to each index of the array, starting at 0. For example, the array containing the 5 first even numbers can be obtained by multiplying the indices by 2, such as:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Array.init` generates an array of a given length by applying a function to each index of the array, starting at 0. The following line of code creates an array containing the first 5 even numbers using a function which doubles its argument:
```

```ocaml
# let even_numbers = Array.init 5 (fun i -> i * 2);;
val even_numbers : int array = [|0; 2; 4; 6; 8|]
```

## Accessing Array Elements

> You can access individual elements of an array using the `.(index)` syntax, with the index of the element you want to access. The index starts from 0 and goes up to the size of the array minus one.  For example, to access the third element of an array `even_numbers`, you would write:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can access individual elements of an array using the `.(index)` syntax, with the index of the element you want to access. The index of the first element is 0, and the index of the last element is one less than the size of the array.  For example, to access the third element of an array `even_numbers`, you would write:
```

```ocaml
# even_numbers.(2);;
- : int = 4
```

## Modifying Array Elements

> To modify an element in an array, we simply assign a new value to it using the indexing operator. For example, to change the value of the third element of the array `even_numbers` created above to 42, we have to write:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To modify an element in an array, we simply assign a new value to it using the indexing operator. For example, to change the value of the third element `even_numbers` of the array created above to 42, we have to write:
```

```ocaml
# even_numbers.(2) <- 42;;
- : unit = ()
```

> Note that this modification doesn’t return the modified array: the value returned by this operation is `unit`, `even_numbers` is modified in place in the current scope. Updating an array's content is a side effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this modification doesn’t return the modified array. The value returned by this operation is `unit`. `even_numbers` is modified in place in the current scope. Updating an array's content is a side effect.
```

Reviewer 3: > 

```suggestion
Note that this operation returns `unit`, not the modified array. `even_numbers` is modified in place as a side effect.
```

## The Standard Library `Array` Module

OCaml provides several useful functions for working with arrays. Here are some of the most common ones:

> ### Lenght of an Array

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Length of an Array
```

> The `Array.length` function returns the size of an array. For example, to get the size of the array `even_numbers` created above:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `Array.length` function returns the size of an array:
```

```ocaml
# Array.length even_numbers;;
- : int = 5
```

### Iterate on an Array

The `Array.iter` function applies a given function to each element of an array. For example, to print all the elements of the array `zeroes` created above, we can apply the `print_int` (as this is an `int array`) function to each element:

```ocaml
# Array.iter (fun x -> print_int x; print_string " ") zeroes;;

> 1 2 42 4 5 - : unit = ()

Reviewer 2: I got this as a result:
`0 0 0 0 0 - : unit = ()`

> The `Array.iter` function applies a given function to each element of an array. For example, to print all the elements of the array `zeroes` created above, we can apply the `print_int` (as this is an `int array`) function to each element:
> 
> ```ocaml
> # Array.iter (fun x -> print_int x; print_string " ") zeroes;;
> 1 2 42 4 5 - : unit = ()

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Array.iter` applies a function to each element of an array, one at a time. The given function must return `unit`, operating by side effect. To print all the elements of the array `zeroes` created above, we can apply `print_int` to each element:

```ocaml
# Array.iter (fun x -> print_int x; print_string " ") zeroes;;
0 0 0 0 0 - : unit = ()
```

```

### Map an Array

> The `Array.map` function applies a given function to each element of an array and returns a new array with the results. For example, to create a new array that contains the square of each element of the array `even_numbers` created above, we can apply the following square function `fun x -> x * x` to each element of the array:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `Array.map` function creates a new array by applying a given function to each element of an array. For example, we can get an array containing the square of each number in the `even_numbers` array:
```

```ocaml
# Array.map (fun x -> x * x) even_numbers;;
- : int array = [|0; 4; 1764; 36; 64|]
```

### Folding an Array

> To combine all the elements of an array into a single result, we can use the `Array.fold_left` and `Array.fold_right` functions. These functions take a binary function, an initial accumulator value, and an array as arguments. The binary function takes two arguments: the current value of the accumulator and the current element of the array and returns a new accumulator value. Both functions traverse the array

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To combine all the elements of an array into a single result, we can use the `Array.fold_left` and `Array.fold_right` functions. These functions take a binary function, an initial accumulator value, and an array as arguments. The binary function takes two arguments: the accumulator's current value and the current element of the array, then returns a new accumulator value. Both functions traverse the array
```

 but in opposite directions. This is essentially the same as `List.fold_left` and `List.fold_right`.

Here is the signature of `Array.fold_left`:

```ocaml

> val fold_left : ('a -> 'b -> 'a) -> 'a -> 'b array -> 'a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Array.fold_left;;
val fold_left : ('a -> 'b -> 'a) -> 'a -> 'b array -> 'a = <fun>
```
I also get the `= <fun>` at the end of the result. Plus, I'd put the prompt command in there for clarity.

```

`fold_left f init a` computes `f (... (f(f init a.(0)) a.(1)) ...) a.(n-1)`

Similarly, we can use the `Array.fold_right` function, which switches the order of its arguments:

```ocaml

> val fold_right : ('b -> 'a -> 'a) -> 'b array -> 'a -> 'a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Array.fold_right;;
val fold_right : ('b -> 'a -> 'a) -> 'b array -> 'a -> 'a = <fun>
```

```

`fold_right f a init` computes `f a.(0) (f a.(1) ( ... (f a.(n-1) init) ...))`

These functions derive a single value from the whole array. For example, they can be used to find the maximum element of an array:

```ocaml

> # Array.fold_left max min_int even_numbers;;
> - : int = 42
> ```
> 
> Where `max` is the maximum function defined on elements of type int.

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
# Array.fold_left Int.max min_int even_numbers;;
- : int = 42
```
````

### Sorting an Array

To sort an array, we can use the `Array.sort` function. This function takes as arguments:
- a comparison function
- an array

> Ir sorts the provided array in place, in ascending order, according to the provided comparison function. Sorting performed by `Array.sort` modifies the content of the provided array, that why it returns `unit`. For example, to sort the array `even_numbers` created above, we can use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It sorts the provided array in place and in ascending order, according to the provided comparison function. Sorting performed by `Array.sort` modifies the content of the provided array, which is why it returns `unit`. For example, to sort the array `even_numbers` created above, we can use:
```

```ocaml
# Array.sort compare even_numbers;;
- : unit = ()
# even_numbers;;
- : int array = [|0; 2; 6; 8; 42|]
```

## Copying Part of an Array into Another Array

> The `Array.blit` function is available to efficiently copy a portion of an array into another array. Similarly to the `array.(x) <- y`  modification instruction, this function modifies the destination in place and does not return the modified array, but returns `unit`. Let’s suppose you want to copy a part of `even_numbers` into `zeroes`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Array.blit` function is available to efficiently copy a portion of an array into another array. Similar to the `array.(x) <- y` modification instruction, this function modifies the destination in place and does not return the modified array. Instead, it returns `unit`. Let’s suppose you want to copy a part of `even_numbers` into `zeroes`:
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `Array.blit` function efficiently copies a contiguous part of an array into an array. Similar to the `array.(x) <- y` operation, this function modifies the destination in place and returns `unit`, not the modified array. Suppose you wanted to copy a part of `even_numbers` into `zeroes`:
```
perhaps add an example of blitting an array onto itself

```ocaml
# Array.blit even_numbers 3 zeroes 1 2;;
- : unit = ()
# zeroes;;
- : int array = [|0; 8; 42; 0; 0|]
```

> This copies 2 elements of `even_numbers` starting at index `3` (this array slice is `[| 6; 8 |]`) into `zeroes`, starting at index `1`. It is your responsibility to make sure that the two indices provided are valid in their respective arrays and that the number of elements to copy is within the bounds of each array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This copies two elements of `even_numbers`, starting at index `3` (this array slice is `[| 6; 8 |]`) into `zeroes`, starting at index `1`. It is your responsibility to make sure that the two indices provided are valid in their respective arrays and that the number of elements to copy is within the bounds of each array.
```

Reviewer 3: the example given does not follow the logic, when all the modifications of `even_numbers` are fixed this needs to be made to agree

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial, we covered the basics of arrays in OCaml, including how to create and manipulate them, and some of the most useful functions and use cases. Please refer to the [standard library documentation](/api/Array.html) to browse the complete list of functions of the `Array` module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we covered the basics of arrays in OCaml, including how to create and manipulate them, as well as some of the most useful functions and use cases. Please refer to the [standard library documentation](/api/Array.html) to browse the complete list of functions of the `Array` module.
```
